hello everyone I'm pleased to announce
my new tour for
2024 beginning in early February and
running through June Tammy and I an
assortment of special guests are going
to visit 51 cities in the US you can
find out more information about this on
my website
jordanbpeterson.com as well as accessing
all relevant ticketing information I'm
going to use the tour to walk through
some of the ideas I've been working on
my forthcoming book out November 2024 we
who wrestle with God I'm looking forward
to this I'm thrilled to be able to do it
again and I'll be pleased to see all of
you again soon
bye-bye every culture on Earth has used
fasting as a healing intervention or a
religious intervention hypocrates knew
about this Jesus knew about this so this
has been known for millennia
that fasting can help it is a
physiological way to induce healing and
it you basically are tapping into the
body's innate ability to heal and repair
[Music]
itself
hello
everyone I'm speaking today with Dr
Chris Palmer he's associated with the
Harvard medical school and with mlan
Hospital which is perhaps the world's
preeminent psychiatric hospital and uh
we talked today about material
Associated for example with his book
2022 book called brain energy Dr Palmer
has been pursuing the hypothesis that
many mental disorders especially the
really severe mental disorders
schizophrenia bipolar disorder major
depression intractable depression with
no apparent environmental cause let's
say or psychological cause might be
associated with metabolic disorder um
mediated primarily by mitochondrial
dysfunction the mitochondria are
basically the energy factories in every
cell and so mitoch and that's not all
they do mitochondrial disorder therefore
is very very serious problem he's been
experimenting with ketogenic diet uh K
in some sense to the diet that my
daughter has been promoting the lion
diet um making the case that use of such
diets can not only reduce the effect of
potential toxins on mitochondrial
function but also increase mitochondrial
metabolism and also help the body heal
by putting it into a state known as a
autophagy or mitophagy which are are
states where the body is actually taking
itself apart as a consequence of food
deprivation and then rebuilding itself
anyways he's um he makes the
case we'll discuss the probability that
this kind of hypothesizing has gone
beyond the merely anecdotal to the point
where there is a tremendous amount of
research supporting the proposition that
dietary factors play a major role in The
Genesis of such severe mental disorders
and not only mental disorders also
physical disorders like obesity heart
disease cancer diabetes you know the
common enemies of mankind and so we're
going to discuss that in detail thank
you for joining us Dr Palmer let's start
out at the level of
conceptualization in your 2022 book
correct me if I get any of of this wrong
because I'm I don't want to put words in
your mouth you're concentrating at least
on the relationship between I would say
brain dysfunction biological
dysfunction um metabolic dysfunction and
what we generally think of as mental
disorders and so the typical more
abstract psychological conceptualization
would be that a mental
disorder something associated with
Psychopathology and undue suffering
let's say with dysfunction in the social
environment and so forth might be a
consequence of faulty beliefs and
perceptions and so they can get bent to
the point where they're
indistinguishable from delusions and
then also skill deficits which is often
what behaviorists remediate and it's
obvious that a skill deficit in Social
ability for example isn't equivalent to
a metabolic disorder but let me start by
asking you how you lay out your
conceptualization of metabolic disorder
and what implications you think that has
for the diagnosis and further
understanding and treatment of of
so-called mental
disorders you know it's
a complicated situation as you even just
began to hint at and you know that maybe
one easy way to outline my
conceptualization is that there are
mental States and there are mental
disorders
so all humans will suffer All Humans
will have anxiety at some point or
another in their life all humans will
get depressed or most humans will get
depressed if they experience tragic
loss um or humiliation and
shame um and those are not brain
disorders as far as I'm concerned that
is the normal state of of being a human
being and as you alluded to depending on
your upbringing and your experiences you
might learn
maladaptive themes or maladaptive
lessons in life people aren't
trustworthy you can't trust anybody and
you go through life that way and that
can actually have very serious
consequences for people but I don't
think those people have brain
disorders the the reason they believe
what they
believe the way that that happened is
all obvious once you understand the
person's full history and so there are
Myriad ways in which humans can suffer
and and develop maladaptive patterns
that do not include brain
disorders and Psychotherapy can be
helpful and just being human and all of
the life skill SKS that you talk about
apply to those people and yet there are
other people who have brain disorders
their brains are malfunctioning they
have anxiety or Panic for no reason they
have crippling OCD for no clear reason
they have crippling unrelenting
depression for no clear reason they have
hallucinations Illusions manic episodes
and other types of symptoms and it is
largely believed in the psychiatric
field that these people do in fact have
brain disorders and that their brains
are
malfunctioning and at the end of the day
what I am arguing is that there is in
fact a central theme to these
malfunctioning brain symptoms and they
revolve around metabolism and that if we
take Take This Global picture and
understand that these brain conditions
are actually metabolic in
nature number one it can help us better
understand how all of the risk factors
can come together to result in mental
disorders or mental illness but much
more importantly it gives us clear
actionable treatment that we
typically do not use today and they span
a wide variety of different treatment
strategies but they include things like
changes in diet changes in
exercise uh looking for hormone or
vitamin
deficiencies um thinking more kind of in
a more sophisticated way about substance
use and thinking in a much more
sophisticated way way about the
medications that we prescribe for
psychiatric conditions because some of
them can improve brain metabolism but we
know that some of them are actually
harmful to
metabolism let me outline a diagnostic
approach to you with regards to the
differential diagnosis of depression and
I've thought about this a lot so tell me
what you think and then we'll turn to a
discussion of the list of contributing
factors to to phys ological brain
dysfunction or illness and we can tie
those togethers okay so one of the
things I noticed as a
clinician and I think that this is key
to solving the mystery of Perhaps
Perhaps of differential response to
serotonin rapake Inhibitors and other
anti-depressants now I don't think it's
the only key but I think it's an
important one I don't think it's one
that's been attended to enough so I
noticed in my practice that there were
two broad classes of people with
depression okay so we can Define
depression first for everybody watching
and listening so depression looks like a
condition analgous to an excess of pain
It's associated with grief and shame and
guilt it it it's characterized by a
decrease in positive em motivation so
less enthusiasm less curiosity less hope
often hopelessness per se and a
proliferation of negative emotion so and
those are separate biochemical systems
to some degree so if you're really
depressed you have no positive emotion
you have way too much negative emotion
and then that manifests itself well it
can manifest itself as a virtual
inability to move even no motivation and
often an overwhelming sense of Doom and
a proclivity even towards suicide so
that's the depressive realm it's a
psychogenic pain condition and it
differs from anxiety um even in its in
although they overlap now I had clients
who were in that condition but then
imagine that those broke into two
classes I have the odd client who by all
appearances by all standards
of multi-dimensional
assessment had fine lives so these would
be people who were reasonably
healthy apart from the depression let's
say who had a functioning marriage who
had friends that they liked and and a
marriage that they liked even though the
depression might have been twisting
their perception of that so for example
they may have thought that they were now
so useless and and contemptible that no
one like their wife could possibly love
them and that they were you know a
burden to their family but they still
had tight family relationships they
often had careers that were
welldeveloped and going fine they were
about as educated as you could expect
they didn't necessarily have any
substance use disorders they did
productive things outside of work but
they were profoundly depressed okay so
that's one category person now the other
category of person wasn't like that at
all they had no relationships they had
no stable marriage they had no friends
they had no job they had no their
educational history was fragmented at
best they had no plan for the future
they didn't have a
life now both of them were miserable and
maybe even equ in in in an equivalent
manner but the first group of people
with a function life was very much
unlike the second group now what I
noticed and I've never found any
literature directly pertaining to this
maybe you know of some I found in my
practice that if I recommended to those
clients the ones who had a functional
life that they try and anti-depressant
it was often likely to have relatively
miraculous effects whereas the people in
the second category the anti-depressant
could maybe help ameliorate the worst of
their suicide side liation and possibly
tilt them a little bit more in the
direction of positive motivation but
generally speaking not a very effective
treatment now and logically because if
all those things were
absent the mere offering of a
biochemical treatment wasn't going to
you know provide someone with no partner
with a highly functional marriage so and
I think in that differentiation we can
also see a distinction between the
biological and that would be what was
hypothetically plaguing the people with
functional lives and the and the
conceptual because it was the absence of
the ability to go about forming all
those relationships say and pursue all
those Pathways in the latter case so the
first thing I'd like to ask you is for
your general thoughts about that
diagnostic approach to distinguishing
between the biological and the so-called
psychological and then well and then how
you go about doing that because you
already pointed out that you accept the
distinction between biological mental
illness let's say and well conceptual
disarray something like that or or lack
of skills yeah so I I think you just did
a great job of
articulating that framework that I just
outlined that there are some people who
have brain disorders their brains are
doing things that don't make sense they
don't make Common Sense the first person
that you described or that first
category of people you described it
doesn't make sense that that person's
depressed they've got a good life
everything's going well for them and
they will often even say that they will
say I don't I don't know what's wrong
with me doctor I don't know what's wrong
with me my wife loves me my kids love me
I have a good job we finally saved up
enough money to get that re that
vacation home that we wanted my I just
got a promotion at work by all intents
and purposes I should be happy and I am
miserable and I feel like a burden and I
don't know what's wrong with me please
help me I would argue that person has
very likely has a brain disorder the
pathways that are hardwired in the brain
to trigger the depression
response are malfunctioning they are
misfiring they are causing ing the
sensations and all of the
experiences and perceptions of
depression when they shouldn't be and
here's an easy analogy so there's you
know all humans will experience pain
pain is a normal human experience if we
injure ourselves we will feel pain if we
get surgery we may have prolonged and
extensive pain those are not
disorders they cause suffering and
people often want help for that and
people often want treatment they might
even take pills for it or they might
need physical therapy or something else
um so it's not that we don't treat pain
it's not but we but they don't have a
pain disorder and then there are other
people who have pain disorders their
pain system is malfunctioning and
causing the sensation of pain when
there's no clear good reason for pain so
that gives us a framework of you know
normal and extreme like when if you get
surgery you may have extreme pain but
those aren't disorders and then somebody
who's got a pain disorder where they
have chronic unrelenting pain for no
good reason their pain system is
malfunctioning and so that that first
category person I would say their brain
the networks that cause all of the
different experiences of depression
those networks are malfunctioning
that they are either overactive or
underactive depending on what symptoms
we're looking at but they've got a a
malfunctioning brain that is causing the
experience of depression the second
category that you mentioned the person
whose life is just a a tragic mess they
have NE they've never had anything good
going for them they don't know how to
create a good life they don't know how
to take care of themselves how to have
good POS positive relationships maybe
they have no purpose in
life those people will in fact
experience depression and if they don't
experience depression that in and of
itself is a disorder anybody in that
circumstance should in fact be depressed
the human brain is hardwired to make
that person depressed because the human
brain is trying to get that person to
get a life to integrate themselves into
Society so that their tribe so that
other humans actually accept them
integrate them into the culture or the
tribe or whatever we want to think about
it and so that and that creates safety
that we as humans are supposed to be
connected with others and that means
that we are supposed to be connected not
only in terms of loving relationships or
work
relationships but we've got
responsibilities we've got
responsibilities to ourselves and to
others and if we're not participating in
that culture in that society that means
we are an outcast we are being shunned
we aren't integrating there's something
wrong and and those people will and
that's a danger it's a danger well so
one of the things I let me let me ask
you what you think about this I mean so
one of the so you know there's a
relationship between the degree to which
a
given brain is likely to produce
serotonin and the relative social status
of that person so higher okay so and
this is gerine biologically to the
problem that you just described because
it turns out if serotonin modulates the
magnitude of pain-like responses to
negative circumstances to stress let's
say and if you're low status which means
if you're low status you're more likely
to have an exaggerated response to
stress and that can kill you across time
that's very well documented very high
relationship between relative social
status and risk for mortality um but the
reason for that and you're pointing to
this because someone might think well
you know your claim that you need to be
integrated within a social Community is
just an arbitrary claim there's nothing
based in reality about that that's just
a it's just a it's just a supposition of
normality and there's no reason to
assume that it's related to mental
health but the reason that's erroneous
is because you are much likely much more
likely to have
opportunity and to have security of the
genuine sort so that's the kind of
security that can save your life if you
have a very well-developed and
functional social network and you're
very well regarded and respected and
integrated within that and as
you
intimated we do have systems that
perceive that and that causes pain in in
the absence of that and that is
definitely a contributing factor to
depression that's not some arbitrary
moral presupposition it's hardwired into
the fact that we are incredibly
interdependent and social creatures and
that's so much so this is something for
everyone to think about too we're so
wired to need that social harmony and
interaction that we can even punish the
most vicious and psychopathic antisocial
criminals by putting them in solitary
isolation so even those guys can't do it
alone okay so depression can be a valid
marker of the inability to be integrated
right and it can become
counterproductive even under those
circumstances but the condition in
itself just like the condition of pain
isn't an indication of
pathology so okay so let's talk about
differential diagnosis So Okay so we've
already agreed as far as I can see that
that that there's a difference between a
physiological disorder and a more
abstract or mental disorder now the
other thing I tried to do in my practice
was to rule out the physiological before
proceeding with the
psychological okay now you pointed to a
bunch of potential contributors to the
physiological so let me list those and
then maybe you can tell me if I missed
any if you dispute any and how you go
about that diagnosis so here's some
things that can make you mentally ill
apart from the contents of your thought
or
perceptions um we know that depression
is associated with often associated with
markers of excess immunological activity
so if you're if you're in a cyto kind
storm you can get depressed there's all
sorts of dietary reasons that we could
delve into there's all sorts of
illnesses that can produce depression as
a side effect um there's an issue of
adverse response to medication um it
might be that you're in bad physical
shape and need to exercise more and some
people are more prone to depression in
the absence of exercise there's a huge
um potential complication of toxin
exposure uh environmental and otherwise
and then there's the associated problem
like one of the quick Pathways to
depression especially if you're
biologically tilted in this direction is
to drink to relative excess three times
a week
because then you're always in alcohol
withdrawal okay so another thing that a
good diagnostician should do is think
well this person presents with
depression but maybe they're ill and
here's you know 10 things we should look
at to rule that out so so so tell me
what you think about that and how you go
about doing that when you're actually
seeing your your patients so I think all
of the things that you mentioned are
absolutely spoton I think that they can
all play a role in the physiological
brain disorder type of depression that
all of those things can result in the
brain malfunctioning and producing the
experience of depression when in fact
the person doesn't have the
psychological or social reasons to
necessarily be clinically
depressed um you know you mentioned
medical diagnosis I think and and that's
a very broad field because numerous
medical conditions are associated with
increased risk for depression all the
way from all of the neurological
disorders epilepsy Alzheimer's disease
Huntington's disease Parkinson's disease
to to hormone imbalances
hypothyroidism or low thyroid hormone
women's hormones a lot of women
experience mood changes mental health
symptoms just around the time of their
menstrual periods they may have
significant changes around you know
around the time of pregnancy and
immediately after
pregnancy um and they can have
significant changes around the time of
menopause men can experience similar
symptoms if they have low
testosterone so there are a wide range
of medical conditions that can all
result in the exact same
symptoms of major depression and that in
my mind is very
curious and we in the mental health
field just shrug that off but what it
suggests is that all of those things are
somehow connecting through some common
pathophysiology yeah yeah and and in my
mind that is actually a really important
clue to solving the puzzle of mental
illness like what causes mental
disorders what causes this tremendous
suffering in millions and millions of
people around the world how can we
develop better
treatments by recognizing that all of
those things must share something in
common to produce the exact same
constellation of symptoms that's
actually really useful information and
in my mind the Common Thread is that
they all impact metabolism and more
specifically these tiny things in our
cells called
mitochondria start off the new year with
balance of nature fruits and veggies
they're a great way to make sure you're
getting essential nutritional
ingredients every single day of the New
Year balance of nature uses an advanced
cold vacuum process that encapsulates
fruits and vegetables into Whole Food
supplements without sacrificing their
natural antioxidants the capsules are
completely void of additives fillers
extracts synthetics pesticides or added
sugar the only thing in balance of
Nature's fruit and veggie capsules are
well fruits and veggies right now not
only will you get 35% off your first
order you'll now get a free fiber and
spice supplement as well balance of
Nature's fiber and spice supplement is a
revolutionary fiber drink with a unique
blend of 12 spices and Whole Foods
there's never been an easier way to make
sure you're getting your daily dose of
fruits and vegetables experience balance
of nature for yourself today go to
balance of nature.com and use promo code
Jordan for 35% off your first order as a
preferred customer plus get a free
bottle of fiber and spice that's
balanceof nature.com promo code Jordan
for 35% off your first preferred order
plus a free bottle of fiber and
spice okay well then let's let's say
that's I would be very interested in
hearing much more detail about that so
you know because I I've delved into
potential physiological causes for
exacerbated pain sensitivity let's say
and and the entire depressive spectrum
of symptoms but not not precisely on the
metabolic front so when so why why did
you given the plethora of contributors
that we've already discussed to the
problem of depression and then the
broader problem of mental disorder why
did you feel that concentrating on the
metab abolic on metabolic dysfunction
per se was the most useful tack to take
and and maybe so let's do two things why
don't you tell us in some real detail
what you mean by metabolic disorder all
the way down to the mitochondrial level
with perhaps an explanation of the
function of mitochondria and then tell
us why you think that's particularly
worth worthy of focus given all the
other contributors maybe as a common
final pathway even given all the other
contributors to depression yeah so so
right now if you ask the leading
psychiatrists in neuroscientists in the
world what exactly causes mental
illness and and we can stay focused
broadly on all of the mental disorders
or we can just hone in on major
depression that first category of
depression that we talked about that
somebody they don't have a reason to be
depressed psychologically or socially
and yet they're showing all this the
signs and symptoms like what is going on
if you ask the leading people they will
say yeah it's just too complicated
nobody can figure it out but we do know
our risk factors and we talk about this
bioc psychosocial model of risk factors
and we say that there are biological
things neurotransmitters hormones
genetics that play a role but there are
psychological and social things people
can develop mental disorders like the
brain disorder type typ of thing from
prolonged trauma or social adversity in
childhood or um loneliness and
disconnection and that those things also
contribute to Mental Illness but exactly
how do they come together right now the
leading people will say no one knows
it's too
complicated the way that I came to
metabolism is because I had some really
important kind of pieces of information
that were quite shocking um that I was
actually using dietary
strategies pure Serendipity I did not
set out to do anything special but I was
changing people's diets to help them
lose weight and noticing dramatic
Improvement in psychotic symptoms and
mood symptoms and other symptoms so okay
so you came at this you you started to
understand this because you started to
examine diet and you were examining diet
you were examining diet why exactly what
was just to help people lose weight this
will take me on a tangent from the
question that I'm going to come back to
you asked me a question I'm going to
come back to it but uh the the this
tangent is that I had this patient with
schizo effective disorder he had been my
patient for eight
years schizo effective disorder is a
cross between schizophrenia and bipolar
disorder this man was tormented and
disabled by his illness he had chronic
hallucinations delusions he was paranoid
he was convinced that everybody in the
world was out to get him people were
laughing at him spying on him trying to
hurt
him he had tried 17 different
medications none of them helped his
symptoms um he had gained a massive
amount of weight and as for my help to
lose weight and I put him on a ketogenic
diet to try to help him lose weight and
within two weeks Not only was he
starting to lose weight but I not began
to notice this powerful anti-depressant
effect in him and the shocking thing
that led me ultimately on this path was
that about two months in so it doesn't
happen overnight but about 2 months in
he starts spontaneously reporting that
his hallucinations and delusions are
starting to go
away that that man went on to lose over
160 lbs has kept it off to this day s
years later he was able to do things he
hadn't been able to do since the time of
his diagnosis he was able to go out in
public and not be paranoid he was able
to complete a certificate program he was
able to perform improv in front of a
live audience he teaches karate now now
he was able to do things that were all
but
impossible for him and somebody with his
diagnosis
and that initially I was just in
disbelief I couldn't believe what I was
seeing and I'm thinking this this can't
be happening kitso effective disorder
doesn't get better and it certainly
doesn't get better from a change in diet
what on Earth is happening so I
initially set out on a journey need to
understand what on Earth is the
ketogenic diet doing and I was quickly
led to its use in
neurology so although a lot of people
know the ketogenic diet as a fad diet or
a weight loss diet it's actually a
100-year-old evidence-based treatment
for
epilepsy and it can stop seizures even
when medications fail to stop seizures
and the reason that's so important to me
is a psychiatrist
is because we use epilepsy treatments in
Psychiatry every day in tens of millions
of people we use pills that were
originally designed to stop seizures and
we use them for a wide range of mental
disorders including depression anxiety
alcoholism dementia and schizophrenia
bipolar disorder and others and so
initially that was a really important
connection because I thought well maybe
that's why this this diet is changing
his brain symptoms is whatever it's
doing to stop seizures maybe that those
same processes are also reducing his
psychotic symptoms like reducing excess
neural activity for example if you
because you could imagine that that
delusional state is a I I'm not saying
this is the case but you could imagine
that it is the case that it is a
consequence at least in part of excess
neural activities now if you have too
much neural activity you're going to get
the electrical storm that characterizes
epilepsy but you could imagine that a
man could be in a psychophysiological
neurophysiological condition where the
spread of ideas around the core idea is
too rapid and too wide and that you know
that a delusion certainly looks like
that to some degree especially a
paranoid delusion and you even see that
to some degree in depression because in
depression one sad idea will trigger an
avalanche of sad ideas
so so so well just a thought with regard
to the potential overlap with epilepsy
okay so you started looking at the
dramatic as you pointed out dramatic
effects of ketogenic diets on epilepsy
treatment and started to
think if that given that that dramatic
effect on brain States exists which is
clearly documented right and no one
disputes it that there's no reason to
assume that there couldn't be more
subtle but still important effects of
dietary transformation and then you
became partly convinced of that as well
because of the I mean the story you tell
of that one client that's a ridiculously
dramatic story because skitso effectiv
personality disorders are notoriously
difficult to treat skitso effective
disorder is a complete bloody
catastrophe because it has all of the
aspects of Personality Disorder that'll
produce social alienation plus all the
intense suffering that's characterized
is the whole hallucinatory nightmare of
delusion so it's a very very serious
personality disorder Neuropsychiatric
condition and then you saw this dramatic
transformation in this one individual
not only on the weight side which is
dramatic enough and unlikely enough
given that most people never lose their
weight right they'll lose it for a time
but they gain it back and more and also
the cessation of the symptoms and also
this makes it even more complex because
it took 2 months this is not an easy
thing to discover right I mean the
person has to be pretty damn committed
to the dietary transformation and also
unlikely to cheat in the interim so okay
so you you you you encountered those
let's return to the metabolic story and
so so initially well and I want to back
up just a little bit and just forgive me
but I want to just correct something
that you said so because I'm talking
about schizo affective disorder which is
really the
fullread cross between schizophrenia and
bipolar disorder oh so oh so this more
than the personality disorder opposed to
the personality disorder which is
schizotypal Disorder so he had oh I see
so you it was even more serious it was
even more serious he basically had
full-fledged schizophrenia and full
full-fledged psychosis full-fledged
psychosis and I see oh okay and so as I
went on you know
initially I'm starting to use it with
other patients and I'm seeing equal
equally transformative and sometimes
even more transformative results so I
know I'm on to something but I also
recognize nobody's going to believe this
nobody in the medical field is going to
believe that a diet could change
something as devastating as
schizophrenia so I need to come up with
at least a potential mechanism of action
I need to understand enough
science to to be a able to make the case
to be able to report this in the medical
literature and so the great news is that
I had two bodies of literature to call
on so there's an entire body of
literature in the neurology field on how
on Earth does the ketogenic diet stop
seizures and there are all of these
known mechanisms of action including
changes in
neurotransmitters um changes in the gut
microbiome decre ining
inflammation um all of these things but
one thing stuck out at me it improves
mitochondrial function and it B which
basically means it improves brain
metabolism the other body of literature
that I had to look at though was the
schizophrenia literature and the bipolar
disorder literature to see well what do
we know about the neurology the
Neuroscience of those
disorders and is there any
overlap and and the the widely held view
is that schizophrenia is just too much
dopamine it that's what that's what
schizophrenia is too much dopamine but
that didn't sit with
this this kind of observation that the
ketogenic diet is dramatically reducing
symptoms the dopamine thing didn't fit
in and so I had to look elsewhere and I
was led to this entire body of
literature two decades long now
documenting that mitochondrial problems
May in fact be the central root cause of
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder okay
let me let me ask you a question there
so well the dopamine hypothesis has been
around for a very long time and it is
the case and it's been a while since I
reviewed this so if if I have if there's
anything that I'm saying that's no
longer like that's out of date let me
know um part of the evidence for that
was that at least with some forms of
schizophrenia you could exacerbate the
symptoms with amphetamines and that you
could also produce amphetamine related
psychosis that's part of the body of
evidence the other part of the body of
evidence is that the antis psychotics
the major antipsychotics do seem to work
like anti- cocaine or anti- um
amphetamine and they do quell the more
forid symptoms of schizophrenia
especially in its acute manifestations
rather than the sort of burnout
schizophrenia that's characteristic
maybe of the much longer term illness so
so and and so given the prevalence of
that hypothesis and the support for its
validity did you see any overlap between
the metabolic hypothesis and the
dopamine hypothesis like is the is the
dopaminergic malun function in your
estimation a secondary consequence of a
deeper mitochondria malfunction or do
you think that the dopamine hypothesis
is more something you know more akin to
observation of a symptom pattern rather
than the core cause because no one knows
why the dopamine system
disregulation anyways I think that's the
key is that you know so first and
foremost I want to say that everything
that you just said is true and that is
in fact the basis for the dopamine
hypothesis however it doesn't fully
account for all of the information that
we currently have we know that
serotonergic antidepressants things like
proac and zolof can also exacerbate
psychosis in people with bipolar
disorder or schizophrenia or other
disorders we know that sleep deprivation
can exacerbate psychosis in a wide range
of people C certainly people with
schizophrenia but even in normal healthy
people if we sleep deprive them long
enough they will begin to hallucinate or
have delusions so that that starts to
suggest wait serotonin now plays a role
and sleep deprivation how does that all
fit together is that does that all
converge at dopamine it does not it does
not converge at dopamine however if we
think about well what could cause
dopaminergic neurons to be overactive
and spew out more dopamine than they're
supposed to be spewing
out then we actually come back to the
mitochondrial or metabolic theory that
I'm proposing the metabolic Theory can
actually explain to us exactly why
neurons might be
overactive or the Neuroscience term is
hyper
excitable but we've got Decades of
science neuroimaging studies cell
biology studies and others where we know
for sure that people with these brain
conditions have hyper excitable neurons
that there are parts of their brain that
just start firing when they should not
fire kind of like a pain cell starts
firing when it shouldn't fire and and so
if in order to understand well what
would make a cell start to fire for no
reason what would make it hyperexcitable
or overactive we actually can turn to
the metabolic or mitochondrial Theory
because that actually connects all of
the dots that can help us understand why
would Zoloft or proac cause psychosis
that can help us understand why would
sleep deprivation cause psychosis and it
certainly confirms what you outlined why
would amphetamines or cocaine cause
psychosis um so I think that you know
the way that I came to this is I started
looking at the entire field initially
just trying to connect the dots for how
on Earth could a ketogenic diet stop
psychotic symptoms and somebody who
presumably had a lifelong genetic
disorder that is what most people think
of as schizophrenia it is a lifelong
genetic disorder it's permanent it's
fixed there essentially is no hope for
this person so I'm trying to understand
how on Earth could a diet do
that as soon as I put all of that
together though and started focusing in
on mitochondria and
Metabolism I started branching out
because to other diagnoses and the
reason I started branching out to other
diagnoses is because because we have a
problem in the mental health field
although we have all of these nice
diagnostic labels like schizophrenia or
bipolar or alcoholism or anorexia or
OCD and we pretend that they are all
separate and distinct disorders the
reality is
that a lot of the people that we treat
in mental health clinics have more than
one of those diagnostic labels it is
rare for somebody to have schizophrenia
and only
schizophrenia almost always they have
schizophrenia and some substance use
problems and some OCD oh and depression
well wouldn't you be depressed too if
you had schizophrenia and oh and anxiety
well wouldn't you be anxious if you had
skiz I we we rationalize it
away but it cuts across all of our
diagnostic categories that there's this
overlap and so I so I started looking
into is there any any meta is there any
evidence that metabolism or mitochondria
could play a role in these other mental
disorders and at the end of the day what
became overwhelmingly clear is that we
for decades have been accumulating this
evidence and nobody to date has really
put it all
together but it is in fact a way to put
all of the evidence that we have
accumulated for decades it's a way to
put it together and have it fit and have
it make sense but once you understand
that science it leads to
solutions that may actually help people
heal and recover from disorders that we
are currently telling people are
lifelong incurable
disorders starting a business can be
tough especially knowing how to run your
online storefront thanks to Shopify it's
easier than than ever Shopify is the
global Commerce platform that helps you
sell at every stage of your business
from the launch your online shop stage
all the way to the did we just hit a
million orders stage Shopify is there to
help you grow our marketing team uses
Shopify every day to sell our
merchandise and we love how easy it is
to add more items ship products and
track conversions Shopify helps you turn
browsers into buyers with the internet's
best converting checkout up to 36%
better compared to other leading
Commerce platforms no matter how big you
want to grow Shopify gives you
everything you need to take control and
take your business to the next level
sign up for a $1 per month trial period
at shopify.com
jbp go to shopify.com jbp now to grow
your business no matter what stage
you're at that's shopify.com
[Music]
jvp okay okay so let me I want to step
through that in a in a sequence the
first thing okay let me recapitulate
so you pointed to First the fact that
there's a tremendous amount of
comorbidity or diagnostic overlap
between the hypothetically separate
categories that we describe as the
various mental illnesses now we know
that's true not least in the fact that
for the mental illness to come to the
attention of a um of a psychiatrist or a
psychologist or an MD for that matter
it's usually a consequence of the
exacerbation of negative emotion and the
decrease of positive emotion so there is
a place where there's immense overlap
right because it's just not a problem
with the possible exception of mania
it's just not a problem that comes to
people's attention unless one of the
major areas of overlap is a
preponderance of negative emotion the
suffering we described but then you
describe that even more densely pointing
out that these hypothetically separate
diagnostic categories when you when you
when you aggregate them they have a
tremendous area of even symptomatic
overlap I know for example can't
remember the study now but showed that
if if you do have a person with a
so-called personality disorder imagine
you could make a list of all personality
disorder symptoms and the one thing you
would get to know from that list
checklist was how many symptoms the
person in front of you had that's a much
more useful prognostic indicator than
diagnostic category right so there's
tremendous overlap of symptomatology now
you think that points to an underlying
commonality of cause right and that and
that and you're hot on the trail of this
metabolic insufficiency so let's start
if you would walk us through what the
mitochondria do tell us why deficits in
mitochondrial function like what they
would produce because well one of the
things that happens just as you age is
your mitochondria start to become less
and less effective so and not everybody
who ages shows signs of mental disorder
although depression and pain Etc
associated with aging are far from
uncommon so take us down to the
mitochondria tell us what they do tell
us how that would manifest itself in
Neuropsychiatric disorder and then maybe
we can move to that because the next
question is okay fair enough why does
the keto diet specifically work and is
that the best of all possible
intercessional diets then we can think
about well where should that also fit
conceptually in the Armament of
Diagnostic and treatment practices okay
so let's start with what do mitochondria
do so most people who have who are even
familiar with the term mitochondria know
them is the PowerHouse of the cell and
what that means is that they take food
and oxygen and they turn it into
ATP um so mitochondria are the things
that are actually using oxygen so we
breathe in oxygen and we breathe out
carbon dioxide mitochondria are using
that oxygen and they are producing
carbon dioxide that we breathe out
mitochondria are taking the food so we
have you know our digestive tract and
other kind of enzymes throughout our
bodies that are breaking food down but
ultimately most of the food at least 90%
of the food that we consume ends up
inside MIT mria so mitochondria are the
processors of food and when they get
food they convert it into one of three
things there I could probably come up
with more categories but I'll one of
three things the three things are they
converted into ATP which is the power
unit of the cell and that's why they are
called the PowerHouse of the cell
they're creating energy or ATP the
second thing that happens to food that
we consume is it may not go all the way
to ATP it we might just break it down
into smaller molecules and then we use
those smaller molecules to produce
enzymes or proteins or neurotransmitters
or hormones or cell membranes so our
bodies are in fact composed of food that
we ate the food that we eat gets broken
down and it turns into our cell and our
neurotransmitters and everything else
and the third thing that can happen is
that mitochondria actually can sometimes
divert that energy and instead of making
ATP or you or making molecules to build
cells they make heat and in fact
mitochondria are the reason we are
warm-blooded animals without them we
would not be warm they they can subtle
they are the things that are making heat
if you get a fever they are creating
that fever if you're too cold it's
because they're not firing enough there
there's something wrong with their kind
of um system that's what most people
know research over the last 20
years has completely shattered that
simplistic notion of what mitochondria
are and this is the reason so some
people ask like Chris Palmer how on
Earth are you coming up with this and if
it's really true why hasn't somebody
else come up with it part of it number
one a lot of other people have kind of
sort of come up with what I'm arguing
and they are hot on this Trail and
continue to be hot on this Trail so I am
not
alone but one of the reasons most people
have not put it together is because this
is a Cutting Edge area of research over
the last 20 years not really in the
mental health field it's more in the
obese field the
cardiovascular field the Aging field the
Alzheimer's disease field all of these
are looking at what do mitochondria do
so that they can better understand their
their kind of
diseases and let me just give you a
brief snapshot of what mitochondria do
and you'll begin to understand how it
starts to connect the mental health
field
mitochondria
make and and they help create regulate
and release
neurotransmitters including serotonin
dopamine neopine phrine Gaba and in fact
those neurotransmitters then impact
mitochondrial function so it's a two-way
street the neurotransmitters affect
mitochondria mitochondria are making and
releasing are helping to release those
neurotransmitters
mitochondria help control the expression
of genes from the cell nucleus that's
the whole area of called epigenetics
mitochondria are Central to epigenetic
expression in cells mitochondria help
turn inflammation both on and off
mitochondria control the first step in
the synthesis of some key hormones
including
cortisol
estrogen
testosterone so we long known that HPA
axis kind of disregulation so too much
cortisol or too little cortisol that
we've known that that's disregulated in
people with mental illness what would
cause that
disregulation actually mitochondrial
disregulation is in fact the leading
theory for what could cause that
disregulation because they are
controlling the first step in the
synthesis they are affected by our diet
our exercise drugs and alcohol impact
their function but here's the kicker
trauma childhood
adversity directly impact mitochondrial
function and
health and so it is a way for us to
begin to integrate the bioc psychosocial
risk factors that we know can play a
role
in what we call mental disorders in
mitochondria their function or
malfunction can begin to help us piece
the puzzle together okay so let me
summarize that and and tell me you tell
me if I've got my understanding right so
you pointed out that classically
speaking mitochondria regarded as the
furnace the energy source of the cell
and therefore the body have been studied
in relationship to their ability to
produce from the food we eat ATP which
is the fundamental molecule by which we
we fuel ourselves let's say and then a
plethora of chemicals and molecules and
also produce heat now it sounds to me
like what you've claimed is that over
the last 20 years that chemical and
molecular production function of
mitochondria has been differentiated and
delineated far more comprehensively so
now we understand that mitochondria are
crucial for the production of various
hormones and neurotransmitters they're
part of the factory that does that
they're also Associated as you said with
the initiation and sensation of
inflammatory responses and also the
regulation of of Gene operation and
that's where we got into a discussion of
epigenetics so for everybody watching
and listening and correct me if I've got
this wrong Dr Palmer is like genes are
part of
the biological code that lays out our
physical pH psychop physiological
function from the ground upward genes
can be turned on and off and they're
turned on and off according to
environmental demand there's other
reasons they can be turned off and on
but that's one of them and so you're
pointing out that mitochondria are play
a role in the switching on and off of
genes like they do in the switching on
and off of inflammation and the
production of hormones and
neurotransmitters so that's another
reason why delving into the cell down to
the level of the mitochondria is a good
place to be looking for the common
pathway that we're searching for with
regards to the generation or the
initiation of mental illness okay so
I've I've got that right yes that's that
is that a reasonable okay so then let's
go to okay good good well let's then
let's go to diet now I want to lay out
another question for you so as you may
know or may not know and the same would
apply to people who are watching and
listening my family has been
experimenting a lot with a radical keto
diet and that an all beef diet with salt
and there's a variety of reasons why
it's all beef which I won't go into but
here's the fundamental issue from the
scientific perspective and you can tell
me what you think about this more
broadly and why you're investigating a
keto diet which is less strict than a
carnivore diet so one of the things we
thought and experimented with when we
were trying to sort out my daughter's
autoimmune illness was well see we had
her tested at one point for allergies to
foods for example and
the basic test came back and skin test
and showed she was allergic to
everything now we thought well what's
the probability that she's going to be
allergic to everything it's like that
just seems un unbelievable but I did
know at that point and this is to your
point with regards to diet one of the
most reliable treatments for arthritis
and this works with virtually everyone
is if you
fast your arthritis goes away now the
problem is it comes back when you eat
anything it's like well wait a second
anything is a lot of things so then you
might say well if you were going to
investigate a potential dietary link
with
pathology you'd want to find the
simplest possible we had are on some
like so-called elimination diets but
they made no conceptual sense and so
what we decided on eventually was to
search for the simplest possible diet
that could actually sustain you over
some reasonable period of time now a
carnivorous diet can do that as we know
from the Inuit for example and the mai
you can live virtually Forever on a
carnivorous diet now the advantage to
that diagnostically is that it
eradicates a tremendous number of
variables right and so you could try a
carnivorous diet if it worked you'd know
that diet is a reason and then knowing
that it worked and being in a condition
where now you've recovered to some
degree you could conceivably add Foods
back one by one and see if you could
regenerate the symptoms now I'm I'm
curious what you think about that
practically and as a diagnostic and step
or and a step in scientific reasoning
but also how you see the relationship
between that extremely restricted diet
and the keto diets that you
described it's it's a really important
question
and um and it it gets a little more
complicated than sometimes people talk
about it so bear with me
so the the ketogenic diet and certainly
a carnivorous diet like you just
described is probably a ketogenic diet
um unless you're eating very lean meat
if you're eating meat with fat ribeye
steaks other types of meat if you're
frying it in beef Tallow or anything
like that it is a ketogenic diet as well
and I just want to start with the
observation that a Keto enic diet is
actually trickery in a way it's tricking
the body into thinking that it is
fasting when it when it isn't fasting oh
I didn't know that oh that's very
interesting and so you also get all the
advant do you get the advantages of of
what is it I can't say it properly Auto
autophagy autophagy absolutely self
devouring yes so it does mimic fasting
it does mimic fasting and that's
actually yeah okay so that was actually
the basis for the development of the
ketogenic diet originally is that a a
neurologist 100 years ago he knew that
fasting could stop
seizures but if you fast people for too
long they starve to death and it's a
really bad treatment so so right so he
actually tried to figure out is there a
way to trick the body into thinking that
it's fasting
get those benefits of
fasting but not have the people starve
to death and like you said is there a
way to actually provide adequate
nutrition and when we're thinking about
these interventions in children with
epilepsy for instance we not only need
to think about adequate nutrition we
need to think about nutrition that can
help those children grow and Thrive and
gain weight and develop their bodies
like they should
and so it was this ingenious neurologist
who developed the ketogenic diet for
that purpose and and so first and
foremost I want to say that there are
kind of two big issues one is that some
people are allergic to things that they
are
eating or maybe they are having a toxic
reaction to things that they are eating
and we can get into processed foods and
all of the artificial stuff and and and
that is
absolutely happening in some cases and
therefore the treatment plan with that
model in mind is figure out what the
problematic foods are eliminate them
from the diet and then you're good to go
but actually fasting and fasting
mimicking diets like the ketogenic
diet like your dog 's kind of heart lion
diet that she's the the lion diet that
she
does that that is actually mimicking the
fasting State and what that's really
doing is is it's actually changing
metabolism in the entire body it is
dramatically reducing
inflammation it is highly upregulating
autophagy and from my hypothesis really
important something called mitophagy
which is mitochondrial repair so it's
basically getting it's getting rid of
old and defective cells but also old and
defective cell parts including defective
mitochondria that when you're in this
fasting state or fasting mimicking diet
State your body is doing all of this
repair it's getting rid of old parts
and then when you eat replacing them
with new ones and that can actually have
profound healing potential independent
of whatever you were eating whether you
were eating a healthy diet or an
unhealthy diet or anything in between
okay okay those benefits can be helpful
to
people and the the fascinating
thing people have known this for
millennia every culture on Earth pretty
much just
about has used
fasting yeah is a healing intervention
or a religious
intervention was often paired with
healing yeah for Millennia hypocrates
knew about this Jesus knew about this to
in in one of the versions of the New
Testament
his disciples called him to say this
child is seizing and we are praying and
it's not stopping this child they
thought it was demon possession actually
so they describe you know frothing at
the mouth and demon possession and they
said you know Jesus we're praying we're
praying and it's not working and he said
this child needs fasting plus
prayer and the fasting plus prayer
stopped the seizure
stopped the demon possession so this has
been known for
Millennia that fasting can help and it's
people back then weren't eating
processed foods so it's not a processed
food problem it is it is a
physiological way to induce healing and
you basically are tapping into the
body's innate ability to heal and repair
itself that's what you're doing when you
fast the 40 days leading up to Easter
lent starts on Ash Wednesday that's
February 14th this is a time of intense
prayer fasting and giving Hallow's
annual pray 40 challenge is one of their
most popular last year over 1 million
people joined this year's pray 40
challenge focuses on surrender and
includes meditations on the powerful
book he leadth me this this is a story
about a priest who became a prisoner and
slave in the Soviet Union during the
Cold War his story is one of Ultimate
Surrender and we are called to offer up
our own worries anxieties problems and
lives to God there will also be lent
music lent specific Bible stories and
other lent and prayers like The Seven
Last Words of Christ with Jim cavel
download the app for free at hall.com
Jordan you can set prayer reminders and
track your progress along the way Hall
is true truly transformative and will
help you connect with your faith on a
deeper level so what are you waiting for
download the hall app today at hall.com
Jordan that's hall.com
Jordan hall.com Jordan for an exclusive
3-month free trial of all 10,000 plus
prayers and
meditations so we need periods of eating
and not eating and the not eating
periods are are the repair periods and
so in a culture like ours where you can
eat any damn thing you want all the time
and everyone does what that implies is
that not only are we making ourselves
obese and and and increasing our
proclivity to diabetes at a rate that's
absolutely staggering but we're also
perhaps never allowing ourselves to
enter into the bio biological condition
that's associated as you said with the
repair processes that go all the way
down into the cellular and now with
regard to the relationship between
fasting and the ketogenic diet is the
ketogenic diet a sufficient replacement
for fasting or a carnivorous diet like
is do you know maybe we don't know this
yet are there benefits to ceasing food
intake alog together that can't be acred
from merely eating let's say a
carnivorous or a keto diet there are and
um and even the even the epilepsy
researchers have found this and they
were initially a little
surprised um that that was the case but
fasting is in fact different than maybe
the carnivore diet which is different
than a ketogenic diet which is going to
be different than maybe a whole food
plant-based diet or or the paleo diet or
the CrossFit diet or whatever diet you
want to talk about um and the reality is
th that range of dietary interven iions
can play a role for different people and
people don't need the same dietary
intervention for their whole life
necessarily so sometimes you can do a
fast get some healing or repair or just
a reboot if you will and that may be
enough and there are plenty of health
and fitness gurus who say that they do a
two or three day fast once or twice a
year for that reason that they are
trying to stimulate autophagy they're
trying to reduce their risk for cancer
based on this science we don't have
long-term studies to know for sure if
that really works but the science
suggests that it might but I think I
think other people in fact are really
sensitive to different types of foods
your daughter is a perfect example of
somebody who might be sensitive and she
may do best with an all meat diet and a
very simple diet and are there other
things that she might be able to eat and
remain healthy there might be but she
would have to go on that kind of
exploratory pathway and one at a time
introduce a new food and see can I
tolerate this food can my digestive
tract tolerate this food do my
autoimmune symptoms start coming back
when I eat this food or not
and and so I think first and foremost I
do want to just point this
out that I think that there's a range of
options for different people I'm not
here to say there's any one diet for all
human beings because I don't believe
that there is one and only one dietary
pattern that's optimal for All Humans I
think different people need different
diets or can benefit from different
dietary patterns at different times in
their lives and depending on what health
conditions they have and I think on one
hand that's really hopeful and useful on
another hand some people get really
frustrated with me because they say Dr
Palmer just tell me what to do exactly
and I don't I don't know them at all and
they're just on social media or whatever
and they tell me exactly what to do I'm
like I don't know you I don't know your
health conditions I don't I don't know
what your digestive tract is like I
don't know what your food preferences
are how should I know what you should
eat
it doesn't mean it's not a solvable
problem it is a solvable problem it's
not rocket science it really isn't
rocket science your daughter has put out
amazing information for people very
practical stepbystep instructions for
people who want to try her dietary
pattern to see if it might help them
there are other plenty of other people
who also put out similar kind of
instruction manuals if you will how to
follow a whole food plant-based diet how
to follow this diet how to follow that
diet so what I would encourage people to
do is kind of experiment figure out well
what works for you what are where are
you at in terms of your
health what sits well with you what are
your overall fit what are your overall
fitness goals if if it's a if it's a man
who's trying to build a lot of muscle
and he's working out a lot he needs more
protein if if he really actually wants
to achieve building muscle you can't
build muscle from nonprotein kind of
plant sourced Foods you just can't um so
it's a range of
options but we have enough
science we have more than enough science
for me to be able to say it is very
clear and understandable why your
daughter experienced such tremendous
health
benefits by doing the diet that she did
it is not
quackery which I know people ACC I I
actually well no wonder your daughter I
mean because well because it's so
Preposterous like it it took us a long
time to swallow the fact that first of
all she couldn't eat anything and my my
wife and I basically have the same diet
I mean it's a very radical solution and
everyone should should be skeptical of
radical Solutions but so let me agree
with you for a second and then point out
a potential area of confusion or
disagreement if you don't mind sure well
you pointed out very clearly that the
advantages of a reductive diet are
twofold one is you may well be um not
able to tolerate a given food so your
body's actually treating it like a toxin
and that's going to be a more or less
serious problem for all sorts of people
in different ways in relationship to all
sorts of different foods okay so a
restricted diet can enable you to start
to evaluate where you might be reactive
um and then there's a separate set of
benefits that go along with the keto
diet SL fasting and that's the that's
the encouragement of a autophagy say
that again how do you say that so
autophagy mitophagy autophagy it's and
mitophagy yes okay so you want to
initiate that now the the the point I
I'm
less I'm more confused about
is you said there's there multiple
Pathways and that there is a point in
experimentation and I agree
wholeheartedly with that but the
practicalities tend to get in the way
you know and so the reason that we
concluded that it was worthwhile let's
say to publicize the carnivorous diet is
because it's actually it's the fastest
and simplest way to reduce the variable
problem to Unity it's like okay if you
just eat beef that's all you're eating
it's one thing and you can do that for a
long time that seems to me to give you
the optimal chance to experiment because
when we played with like the uh I don't
remember what the other diets were
called um there's one fmop f is that
right fmop diet fod map yeah fod map fod
fod map diet right well it made no sense
logically and there were still things
within it that looked very contradictory
so so I understand your impetus your
your your insistence on the utility of
experimentation and your proclivity to
presume that there's no one siiz
fits-all solution but we have said
that having said all that a keto diet
and a carnivorous diet does produce
autophagy and mitophagy and that's a
very necessary thing and it also is a
very simple approach even though you
know it's behaviorally comp and that's a
problem cuz it's actually hard to only
eat meat so so what do you think like
what do you think are you willing to
speculate on what might constitute a
reasonable generic approach to dietary
experimentation because it is a complex
thing to undertake so I completely agree
with your
approach and your kind
of I agree that a carnivorous Di
diet May in fact be the gold standard
Elimination Diet to see to see if to see
if a change in dietary pattern can
produce the health benefits that a
person is
seeking um the reason I'm hesitant to
recommend it for everybody is because I
already know the nutrition experts will
vill
vilify me along with you and Michaela
and
others and and so I want to throw are
those the same experts that recommended
the food
pyramid don't get me St don't don't even
get me started on that because that food
pyramid really messed up my own personal
health but
um but so for the people who say well no
there's no way I'm only going to eat
meat then I I I want to I want to at
least meet them where they're at and say
fine you don't have to only eat meat
there are lots of options you could try
the fod map diet you could try other
diets you could try a whole food
plantbased like I don't want to give up
on them and I don't want to let them
know that it's like carnivore or nothing
so I want I want be able to understand
however if somebody is really really
sick and needs an a drastic
intervention doing a water only fast
Maybe with some electrolyte
supplementation and other things doing a
maybe a medically supervised even
because if this person is really sick
they're already down and out and so
maybe we need to monitor them but doing
a water only fast is really the ultimate
Elimination Diet because we're
eliminating all food we're really
letting the digestive tract rest and
repair if the digestive tract is
inflamed we're allowing maybe that
inflammation to
subside we know that there is a gut
brain connection and that that plays a
role in a wide range of mental disorders
all the way from autism to depression to
anxiety to schizophrenia to binge eating
disorder to bulimia nervosa like there's
a wide range of mental disorders we have
growing a growing body of evidence that
the
gut
actually problems in the gut get
transmitted through the vegus nerve and
through other endocrine pathways through
serotonin actually and other
Pathways up to the brain and that that
directly impacts brain function and or
brain metabolism brain metabolic
function which then impacts
neurotransmitters and everything else so
water only fast would be maybe the most
Dam drastic intervention but again you
can't you can't fast for too long
because you're going to starve to death
and I wouldn't want to do that in an
underweight person
and this the second best version is
exactly what you've
described the the Lin's diet which is
meat just meat beef alone it's enough
nutrition to sustain a
human there will be people already I can
hear people already saying fiber fiber
is really good Dr Palmer how dare you
get rid of fiber or this is I'm not
saying you don't need it if you don't
produce much waste and you don't produce
much waste on a carnivore diet and well
and so the thing is is I think you're
right though that if if somebody's
really in trouble with serious
symptoms or if somebody just wants to do
maybe a one month or three Monon
experiment to see will this improve my
symptoms I would actually encourage
people to give it three months right
that's about what we've concluded too
it's about three months do a carnivore
diet or or a ketogenic diet if you don't
want to do that because I have some
patients who you know I've talked about
the carnivore diet with them and they're
like no way no way I'm like okay well
let's do a therapeutic ketogenic diet
the therapeutic ketogenic diet I can
solidly stand behind and the reason I
can solidly stand behind that you know
the carnivore diet is a ketogenic diet
but there are other variations of
ketogenic diets and the reason that I
can solidly stand behind the ketogenic
diet is because we have an enormous
evidence
base all the way from animal models cell
biology models to human clinical
trials of ketogenic diets for seizures
for weight loss for type 2 diabetes for
type 1
diabetes for kidney disease for cancer
and other conditions and we have good
evidence that a ketogenic diet can in
fact be safe can be highly effective for
many of those conditions and and so I
just stand solidly behind that science
or on the shoulders so to speak of that
science but I don't disagree with you in
terms of what you're saying about the
carnivore diet and some of the benefit
well and well also I should say too like
as a behavioral psychologist I mean
there's no sense suggesting something to
someone they won't do
so if you can generate a plethora of
Alternatives some of which aren't quite
so extreme and they might work more
power to you so okay so let me ask you a
specific question I have a specific
reason for this so I'll start with a bit
of a proma so my wife had a very rare
form of cancer a bini tumor in her
kidney and the 11mon mortality rate for
bini tumors which have only been
reported about 200 times is
100% And she lived through it now she
had surgical interventions and it's a
complex story but we believe tentatively
that the reason that this didn't kill
her apart from the surgeries and various
other factors that came into play was
perhaps because she was on the carnivore
diet and very and very religiously so to
speak now I have a more personal reason
as well more specifically personal at
the moment for asking you this question
um I know of someone who's in very deep
trouble who's suffering from
cancer and I'm wondering you know if you
have a loved one who's Afflicted in that
way and they're starting to run out of
options by the way on the treatment
front and facing the proliferation of
their cancer I know you can starve
cancers so as a practicing physician at
what point in the progression of cancer
do you think it's reasonable or
unreasonable to say look you got nothing
to lose from a water fast for three days
followed by like a month or two months
of pure carnivore diet and then we could
re-evaluate your circumstances at that
time and so what because I'm C I'm
thinking about having a chat with this
person about exactly this and so I'm
wondering like what do you have to say
I'm not a physician right and so I'm
wanding out of my territory to some
degree on the dietary front although
that became necessary for all sorts of
reasons but I'm also extremely
interested in the Neuropsychiatric
implications so what do you think on the
cancer
front
so I'm not an
oncologist so so I want I I want to say
for the record this is way out of my
territory and I've I've actually been
asked this question by some close
friends even should I do a ketogenic
diet I have cancer I'm fighting cancer
I'm going to do the Cho or radiation or
surgery or whatever but should I also do
a ketogenic diet and and my my honest
advice is because I am out of my area of
expertise I really encourage people to
work with their
oncologist fair enough and the reality
is that we we have an increasing number
of clinical trials that are ongoing
right now where they are adding
ketogenic and other dietary intervention
to the chemotherapy or radiation or to
see if in fact it may play a role and we
know that you know in general my sense
from the published
literature
um Dr Thomas cied is kind of an expert
in this area of ketogenic diets for
cancer what's his name Thomas CED s y f
r i e d I think um Thomas Cy and he so
he's written a book on cancer is a
metabolic
illness in general once cancer gets
started at that point it's probably too
late for a dietary intervention in most
cases to cure the cancer
however we have strong reason to believe
and this is why these clinical trials
are getting started we have strong
reason to believe that a a dietary
intervention like a ketogenic diet or a
carnivore diet or water fasting or
intermittent fasting may slow the growth
of that tumor
May and and slowing the growth of a
tumor gives us more time to do the
definitive intervention to get that
cancer out of that person's body well
also there's good evidence that fasting
reduces chemo and radiation induced
nausea so that also makes the treatment
more tolerable at least in principle
absolutely and and these dietary
interventions are decreasing
inflammation they are decreasing
insulin and insulin is a growth factor
and it is a growth factor for tumors as
well so again we're basically doing
everything we can to try to slow the
growth of this tumor while the
oncologists are trying to kill the
cancer with surgery chemo or radiation
and it you know it sounds you know thank
you for sharing your wife's story it's
it's a really well it's an anecdote you
know but anecdotes are good well look
man they're not data but they're good
sources for hypothesis generation I
think they are great sources they are
fantastic sources for hypothesis
generation and again you anybody who
says well that's just an anecdote I
would want I would want you to push back
and say no actually there are clinical
trials
underway and that is not anecdote
anymore right she she is an example of a
scientific theory that is progressing
through the oncology field F already so
anybody who tries to say well you know
that's just an anecdote well no it's not
just an anecdote there's a tremendous
body of science there are clinical
trials underway now there are animal
models supporting that ketogenic and
other dietary interventions can slow the
progression can actually shrink
tumors um the reason I'm hesitant to say
cure is because so Dr cyre the reason I
brought up is you know he has published
a couple of case reports in the medical
literature and there was one woman who
had what was built is an incurable brain
tumor a gleo
blastoma and she went on a very very
strict medically supervised ketogenic
diet calorie restricted even and in fact
her gleo blastoma shrunk to the point
that it was
undetectable but after about N9 months
so they thought maybe she was cured cuz
it shrunk a
lot she stopped the diet the tumor came
back with a vengeance and she died so I
just point that out that I think that we
still have to encourage people to work
with
oncologists and try their best to kill
all
cancer so so maybe we could close the
this off well first of all we can close
it off if you have anything else that
you need to bring to people's attention
but one of the other things I'd like to
hear from you you know you told that
story of your patient with schizo
effective disorder and his remarkable
recovery with regards to his
accompanying obesity as well as his
mental illness what else have you seen
that was part of what motivated you to
pursue this so
assiduously tell us more stories well so
I can tell you lots of stories but I
don't want anybody to come away from
this thinking this is anecdotal
anymore right for me as a professional
it started with that anecdote it is no
longer in the realm of anecdote anymore
we have hundreds if not thousands of
patients with bipolar disorder with
schizophrenia with chronic unrelenting
depression with OC D with anorexia
nervosa with alcoholism for God's sakes
of all
things we have people with all of these
different
diagnoses who are coming out of the
woodwork sharing their stories of
recovery and sometimes
remission some of these people are able
to get off all of their psychiatric meds
and remain in
remission um we have clinical trials
underway at least I think 15 clinical
trials underway now at Harvard Medical
School at Oxford at John's Hopkins at
UCLA at UC San
Francisco um and many other institutions
literally around the world we've got
clinical trials underway so anybody who
wants to say well this is just anecdotal
ex evidence no it's it's Way Beyond
anecdotal evidence now at this point but
the stories that I want to share that I
just alluded to a woman who had bipolar
disorder had become psychotic when she
got
manic so awful awful illness she is
sharing her story publicly about how the
antipsychotic medications and mood
stabilizers that she took made her
clinically obese made her gain massive
amounts of
weight she felt awful she had lowgrade
depression she was plagued with
recurrent
suicidality after starting some of the
medications that she had to start and
she has now put her bipolar disorder
into remission for over two years she
she heard about me she heard me on a
podcast she has read my book she
implemented the treatments that I've
outlined mind and she is off all her
medicines in full remission I
have literally I have thousands of
people reaching out to me for
help so I should say for the record
unfortunately for your listeners I'm not
taking new pages or consultations I'm
really sorry because I've I've literally
got a weight list of over 2600 people
already but I have treated I've treated
patients you know one person in
particular I can share their story
publicly because they are very public
already so I am not breaking any
confidence they are billionaires
literally
billionaires their son had bipolar
disorder a really bad case of it he had
tried 29 different medications in in and
out of hospitals in and out of
Residential Treatment programs seeing
the best bipolar
specialists in the
world and they as a family he is an
individual she as a mother we're told in
no uncertain terms your son has
treatment resistant bipolar disorder he
is going to be disabled for life you
need to accept that he is going to be
sick for the rest of his life you are in
denial your denial is the problem stop
denying that your son has a serious
mental illness and he's never going to
get better just accept it and move
on they came to me about three years ago
now saying we heard about you and this
diet and bipolar and we we're we're not
giving up yet we're not ready to give up
even though everybody's trying to
encourage us to give
up will you help
us I talked with them I met with his
treating psychiatrist and we partnered
together because I'm in Massachusetts
there in California so I wasn't legally
allowed to treat him as the treating
psychiatrist so I was a
consultant it is now 3
years within 4 months of starting a
ogenic diet his bipolar symptoms were in
full and complete
remission he is off of probably 75% of
the medicines that he had been taking so
he's not completely off medicine at this
point but he is slowly but surely
tapering
off but he has not had an episode since
he does not have bipolar symptoms his
illness is in remission he has finished
College he works fulltime time he has a
full life he's excited to be
alive and this was a man that was being
told by the best experts they were they
are billionaires they had access to the
best of the
best and the best of the best in the
mental health field were encouraging
them to give up hope they were
encouraging them to just give up just
write him off just accept that he's
going to be disabled for life life and
they refuse to accept
that and he's living a new life now and
so they have created a nonprofit
organization called metabolic mind they
have
funded I they don't share their
financials with me but to the best of my
knowledge at least probably $70 million
of research now focused on bipolar
disorder and metabolic
strategies they are really help helping
to move this field forward and we've got
an international team of psychiatrists
neuroscientists mitochondrial biology
experts metabolism experts all working
together to move this field
forward I just got a major gift a $3
million gift from a different
philanthropist to start a new program at
mlan hospital the metabolic and mental
health program and oh yeah we are going
to be
launching this so for people who listen
to this and are skeptical I get it you
have every reason to be skeptical this
is new and shocking information and I am
and I am trying to encourage people to
not give up hope I am trying to
encourage
people that even if you're told that
there is no hope that you just need to
accept that you've got a chronic
horrible debilitating illness and that's
just the way it is
I want you to rise up I want you to
learn more about this work I want you to
learn more about what you can do and I
want to empower people first and
foremost with hope and then with
knowledge and then with practical
strategies that they can Implement just
like you and your daughter and your wife
and others have implemented you take
control you learn things you take
control and sometimes it really works
out beautifully and people get amazing
Health outcomes and that's the way it
should
be hey Dr Palmer that's a very good
place to stop and so we're going to stop
with that um thank you very much for
taking my questions and walking everyone
through that congratulations on the new
gift and I'm very much looking forward
to seeing what's H what happens with
your Center please don't hesitate to
stay in touch and let me know whenever
you come across something that you think
is new and particularly compelling I
mean this is a ridic I mean I've seen
literally hundreds of people on my tour
now who've come up to me in the meet and
greets afterwards and have said you know
I've lost 150 pounds in the last 10
months people told me that was
impossible I've got my life back my
psychiatric disorders are in remission
I'm wondering maybe this is a closing
thought tell me what you think about
this because I think we're at this point
and I think this is perhaps what you're
pointing out my sense is that with the
really severe mental disorder
so intractable depression especially in
the absence of Life circumstances that
would point in that direction manic
depressive disorder the the serious
psychosis that as mental health
professionals as Physicians our primary
assumption at the moment should be that
these are metabolic related or other
physiological disorders until there is
compelling proof otherwise 100% I am
firmly committed to that and again there
are de there's Decades of science to
confirm this the neuroimaging studies
all of the genetic studies when they
look at the genes that increase risk for
schizophrenia or bipolar disorder and
when they look at what do these genes do
guess where they converge metabolism and
mitochondria it's not it's not dopamine
it's not serotonin it's metabolism and
mitochondria and in many ways this is a
game Cher and the reason it's so
important is
because there are solutions available
today like dietary strategies that
people can implement we don't have to
wait 50 years for some novel treatment
to work its way through the development
and kind of you know review process with
the FDA we don't need to wait we've got
things we can do
today all right sir well I'm going to
continue my discussion with Dr Palmer on
The Daily wire plus side of the
interview dividing line let's say and so
uh I want to find out from him a bit
more about what shaped his interest in
the medical community in medical
practice I want to find out why he
focused on Mental Health I want to see
what his vision is for his new center
into the future and so on if you're
inclined to join us for that additional
half an hour please feel um invited and
welcome to do so thank you very much to
the film Cru here and are you in
Massachusetts are you in Boston today I
am in Arlington Mass and I understand
you're in Arlington my old Hometown yes
your old Hometown my own toown yeah yeah
so that's great all right all right and
so thank you to the film crew here up in
Northern Ontario as well and uh thank
you to everyone who's watching and
listening your time and attention is is
much appreciated thank you very much sir
thank
[Music]
you